GWEN IFILL: Good evening. I'm
Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
tonight: The
Pakistani government announces a
crackdown
after an Easter massacre
targeting Christians
leaves 70 dead and hundreds
wounded.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead:
Bernie Sanders
sweeps the weekend's primaries
by huge margins
in Alaska, Washington, and
Hawaii. We get
analysis on that and other
campaign news from
our Politics Monday duo.
GWEN IFILL: Plus, a report from
the front
lines against ISIS, where Iraqi
troops are
beginning an offensive to take
back the city
of Mosul.
JANE FERGUSON: Civilians are
running from
their homes where the fresh
fighting has broken
out. These people came from the
villages recently
retaken from ISIS, seizing the
chance to escape
the fighting.
JUDY WOODRUFF: All that and more
on tonight's
"PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
JUDY WOODRUFF: Shooting erupted
inside the
U.S. Capitol Visitors Center
this afternoon.
Police say a man was going
through security
screening when he pulled a gun
and pointed
it at officers. They shot and
wounded him
and took him into custody. A
female bystander
was injured, but not seriously.
The Capitol police chief said it
appears to
be an isolated incident.
MATTHEW VERDEROSA, U.S. Capitol
Police Chief:
I want to stress that, while
this is preliminary,
based on the initial
investigation, we believe
that this is an act of a single
person who
has frequented the Capitol
grounds before,
and there is no reason to
believe that this
is anything more than a criminal
act.
JUDY WOODRUFF: The shooting
prompted the entire
U.S. Capitol complex and nearby
White House
to go on lockdown for a time.
Congress is
currently in recess, so most
lawmakers were
traveling or back home in their
districts.
GWEN IFILL: The governor of
Georgia today
vetoed a bill to let religious
groups deny
services to homosexual, bisexual
and transgender
people. Republican Nathan Deal
said there's
no need to discriminate in order
to protect
religious liberties.
Meanwhile, in North Carolina,
gay and transgender
groups filed suit against a new
state ban
on local laws providing for
transgender bathrooms
and other protections.
WOMAN: This is not about a
bathroom, this
is not about a cake, and this is
not about
flowers at a wedding. This is
about discrimination.
This is about being afraid of
where this world
has gone and where we will
continue to go.
GWEN IFILL: Republican Governor
Pat McCrory
signed the ban into law last
week. It overturned
a Charlotte ordinance allowing
transgender
people to use the bathroom that
matches their
identity.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Belgium, the
death toll
rose to 35 in last week's terror
attacks in
Brussels. And police called for
the public
to help identify a key suspect.
Emma Murphy of Independent
Television News
reports from Brussels.
EMMA MURPHY: The man in the hat,
believed
to be the surviving bomber from
the Brussels
Airport attack, who he is and
where he is
still unknown.
Today, Belgian authorities
released this video
of him walking through the
airport with the
other two attackers. Moments
later, they blew
themselves up. But when his bomb
failed to
detonate, he fled. Police are
now appealing
for those who may know the most
wanted man
to get in touch.
As that footage was released,
prosecutors
confirmed that more people had
died in the
attacks than first thought.
WOMAN: Well, we know now that
four people
have died in a hospital after
the attack and
that 31 died in the crime scene;
28 of these
31 people were identified
formally. And we
are still trying to give the
three families
of the three victims news about
their relatives.
EMMA MURPHY: People have today
charged three
more people following days of
raids, Yassine
A., Mohamed B. and Aboubaker O.
all accused
of participating in terrorist
activities.
Meanwhile, a man arrested at
this apartment
and named as Faycal C. when he
was charged
with terrorist offenses has been
released,
police saying they didn't have
enough evidence
to hold him.
Almost a week after Najim
Laachraoui and Ibrahim
El Bakraoui attacked airport,
the memorial
to those they killed remained
outside. There
is a wish to get this place open
again soon,
but with additional security.
Tomorrow, 800
airport staff will be asked to
check in as
if they were passengers in order
to test the
efficiency of the new systems.
JUDY WOODRUFF: This evening, an
all-faith
service was held at the Brussels
Cathedral
in tribute to the victims of the
attacks.
GWEN IFILL: And in Syria,
government forces
began combing Palmyra for mines
and bombs
left by Islamic State militants.
The army
captured the ancient city
yesterday, clearing
the way to advance toward
militant strongholds
in the east.
But during their 10-month
occupation, ISIS
fighters destroyed some of its
most revered
treasures. they include temples
dating back
more than 1,800 years.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Former Cuban
leader Fidel Castro
spoke out today on President
Obama's historic
visit, and rejected his appeal
for warmer
ties. In a long letter to state
media, Castro
catalogued U.S. actions against
his regime,
and he dismissed Mr. Obama's
call to -- quote
-- "leave the past behind."
But, in Washington, White House
spokesman
Josh Earnest brushed aside the
Castro criticism.
JOSH EARNEST, White House Press
Secretary:
The fact that the former
president felt compelled
to respond so forcefully to the
president's
visit, I think, is an indication
of the significant
impact of President Obama's
visit to Cuba.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mr. Obama didn't
meet with
Fidel Castro last week. He did
have several
meetings with his younger
brother, Raul Castro,
who is Cuba's current president.
GWEN IFILL: Chicago's police got
a new interim
boss today, in the face of a
federal investigation
over the use of deadly force.
Veteran Officer
Eddie Johnson was appointed by
Mayor Rahm
Emanuel. Johnson's predecessor
was forced
out last fall over the killing
of 17-year-old
Laquan McDonald by a white
officer.
JUDY WOODRUFF: California
Governor Jerry Brown
has formally unveiled a plan to
raise the
state's minimum wage to $15 an
hour. Brown
says it's a landmark deal to
increase the
current minimum from $10 an
hour, in stages,
by 2022. If approved by the
state legislature,
it will be the highest statewide
rate in the
country.
GWEN IFILL: There is word the
Justice Department
will end its encryption fight
with Apple.
It's widely reported the
department is dropping
the legal effort to make the
company unlock
an iPhone. It was used by one of
the San Bernardino,
California, shooters. The
Associated Press
says the FBI used another method
to decrypt
the phone's data.
Wall Street had a quiet Easter
Monday. The
Dow Jones industrial average
gained 19 points
to close at 17535. The Nasdaq
dropped six
points. The S&P 500 added one.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And the President
and Mrs.
Obama hosted their final White
House Easter
egg roll today. Thousands of
children turned
out to take part in a tradition
that goes
back to 1878. The president also
read the
children's classic "Where the
Wild Things
Are." And there was basketball,
tennis and
a run hosted by the first lady.
GWEN IFILL: Still to come on the
"NewsHour":
the group and the motives behind
the deadly
Easter Sunday bombing in
Pakistan; a fight
to push back ISIS in Northern
Iraq; our Politics
Monday team on the week ahead on
the campaign
trail; and much more.
Monday team on the week ahead on
the campaign
trail; and much more.
The Iraqi government last week
announced the
beginning of what it said is the
campaign
to free Iraq's second largest
city from ISIS
control.
Mosul was overrun nearly two
years ago and
has become a vital hub for the
group's operations
in Iraq. But whether Iraq's
military is up
to the challenge is an open
question, even
as the potential grows for
deeper American
involvement.
Special correspondent Jane
Ferguson reports
from the front lines near
Makhmour, Iraq.
JANE FERGUSON: In an effort to
soften ISIS
positions, Iraqi forces bombard
them repeatedly.
They are trying to push forward
from this
sandbank up the hill to a
village Islamic
State fighters are dug into.
Last week, the Iraqi army
suddenly announced
the launch of the long-awaited
battle for
Mosul city. In reality, so far,
just several
villages have been retaken in
the Makhmour
area, well south of Mosul.
This is as far as the front line
comes for
these Iraqi troops. They are
mortaring the
village in that direction that
is just on
that hill. It's about
half-a-kilometer from
here. And that's where ISIS
positions are.
That village is called al-Nasr.
They plan
to then move in and try to
occupy the village,
but they have been trying to do
that for three
days.
Far beyond that village is the
city of Mosul,
and bit by bit, inch by inch,
they plan to
retake it. So far, progress is
slow. Iraqi
forces swiftly abandoned their
positions here
in 2014, when ISIS swept across
the country.
Morale in the military has yet
to fully recover.
So, when Iraq's commander of
ground forces,
Lieutenant General Riyadh Jalal
Tawfiq, showed
up near the front lines in an
unexpected visit,
there was great fanfare. But he
didn't wish
to talk about past mistakes.
When ISIS took Mosul Iraqi
forces quickly
withdrew from the city when ISIS
were moving
quickly. How do you feel like
you can prevent
that happening again?
LT. GEN RIYADH JALAL TAWFIQ,
Iraq (through
translator): These issues depend
on the time
frames and plans designed for
them. After
that, for every incident, there
will be a
response. If God wills it, we
will retake
Mosul.
JANE FERGUSON: The battle lines
in Iraq are
as complex as the country's
woven identities.
Iraqi forces are holding this
ground alongside
Kurdish fighters called
Peshmerga. They are
a skilled fighting force,
protecting the semiautonomous
Kurdish region, which borders
Mosul. They
are holding the line on both
ends of the Iraqi
army.
Peshmerga fighters are supported
by U.S. airstrikes
when they confront ISIS, but are
not given
the extensive military equipment
the official
Iraqi army receives from
America. This Peshmerga
commander, Colonel Naji
Bedaroni, wandered
over to inspect their progress.
He wasn't impressed.
COL. NAJI BEDARONI, Iraq
(through translator):
The operation is very weak. It's
not strong
enough. I believe that if the
Peshmerga had
the equipment they have, we
could liberate
this village in three to four
hours, not three
to four days.
JANE FERGUSON: Kurdish forces
have pushed
ISIS out of most of their areas.
An agreement
for them to take part in the
battle for Mosul,
a mostly Arab city, has yet to
be reached.
But without the Peshmerga, the
Iraqi army
will struggle to retake the city
alone.
Are the Peshmerga taking part in
this fight?
COL. NAJI BEDARONI (through
translator): For
this, we need a political
decision. That area
that is being targeted for this
operation
is not a Kurdish area. We are
just guarding
our bunkers. If we get orders,
for sure we
can do that, but, until now, we
have not gotten
any orders.
JANE FERGUSON: How is the
relationship between
the Kurdish Peshmerga fighters
and the Iraqi
army?
COL. NAJI BEDARONI (through
translator): We
are coordinating with them. We
are helping
them. But they are weak. They
don't believe
strongly in the cause.
JANE FERGUSON: Soon, we are on
the move, to
another part of the battlefield.
Unseen on
this front line, but still
playing a major
role, are U.S. forces, providing
advise and
assist and support for Iraqi and
Kurdish forces.
An American Marine was killed
earlier this
month, not long after arriving
at a base in
here in Makhmour. Only after his
death did
the U.S. military announce the
presence of
the Marines.
Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of
Staff General
Dunford admitted last week there
will be more
U.S. boots on the ground soon.
GEN. JOSEPH DUNFORD, Joint
Chiefs of Staff
Chairman: We have a series of
recommendations
that we will be discussing with
the president
in the coming weeks to further
enable our
support for the Iraqi security
forces.
So, again, the secretary and I
both believe
that there will be an increase
to the U.S.
forces in Iraq in the coming
weeks, but that
decision hasn't been made.
JANE FERGUSON: The U.S. military
in Makhmour
declined requests from "PBS
NewsHour" for
an interview.
Fighting between ISIS and the
Iraqi army and
Kurdish forces has flattened
village after
village here. The scenes are of
complete devastation.
Civilians are running from their
homes where
the fresh fighting has broken
out. These people
came from the villages recently
retaken from
is, seizing the chance to escape
the fighting.
We have just come upon this
scene here of
civilians fleeing the frontline.
Further back
there, as far as the eye can
see, where cars
are coming from, there are
several villages
where ISIS have either retreated
or have been
pushed out by Iraqi forces.
Civilians are
fleeing while they can,
anticipating perhaps
more maneuvers.
Not everyone is jubilant.
Traumatized and
exhausted, these women and
children arrived
at another front-line position
while we were
filming. They ran from their
village as ISIS
retreated. A girl was killed. We
are told
ISIS shot her as she ran away.
This elderly
woman said they were being held
as human shields.
"The ISIS were wearing explosive
belts and
we couldn't leave because of
them," she cries.
Where are the men?
WOMAN (through translator): They
wouldn't
let them leave because they were
police and
army. They slaughter. They took
seven from
my family.
JANE FERGUSON: This outpost is
manned by another
group involved in this
offensive, Hashd al-Shaabi,
or Popular Mobilization Fores.
They are militia,
and quickly descend into
fighting with the
official army commanders
accompanying us.
In other areas retaken from ISIS
like Ramadi
and Tikrit, such forces are
predominantly
Shia, but, here, we are told
these men are
Sunni tribesmen. We are told to
leave.
On this battlefield, it's not
always clear
who's in charge. The fight to
retake Mosul
from ISIS will be the toughest
yet. Losing
the city could be a deadly blow
for the terror
group. Given the chaos of this
battle's earliest
stages, a quick victory seems
out of reach.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Jane
Ferguson
in Makhmour, Iraq.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Pakistan, the
government
and people were reeling from
yesterday's terrorist
attack in Lahore. It's the
country's cultural
capital.
The crime scene was strung with
police tape
and emptied of visitors this
morning, while
investigators searched for
evidence. Sunday's
suicide bomber targeted
Christians at an Easter
celebration. But most of the
dead were Muslims
who'd been enjoying the park on
a weekend.
MAN (through translator): I was
standing there
near the seesaw when the blast
occurred. The
explosion was very loud. As we
rushed over
here, we saw a pool of blood and
people lying
here and there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: A breakaway
Taliban faction
claimed responsibility, its
fifth attack since
December. In a challenge to the
government,
the militants said in a
statement: "We have
entered Lahore."
The eastern city in Punjab
province, the country's
richest and most populous, is a
power base
of Prime Minister Nawaz Sharif.
His government
launched a paramilitary
crackdown in Punjab
today. And after visiting the
wounded, Sharif
returned to Islamabad, vowing to
defeat what
he called the extremist
mind-set.
NAWAZ SHARIF, Pakistani Prime
Minister (through
translator): We will not let
them raise their
heads again. We will not allow
them to play
with the lives of the people of
Pakistan.
This is my resolve. This is my
government's
resolve.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But Muslim
extremists protested
outside Parliament for a second
day. They
chanted "Death to Nawaz" and
demanded authorities
impose Islamic Sharia law.
Back in Lahore, funerals played
out all day
as victims, including some of
the children,
were laid to rest.
MAN (through translator): These
people were
innocent. They had no idea when
they left
their homes what was going to
happen to them.
Terrorists killed these innocent
people. We
demand strict punishment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And at the
Vatican, Pope Francis
called the attacks vile and
senseless.
We explore the situation in
Pakistan now with
Husain Haqqani, who was
Pakistan's ambassador
to Washington from 2008 to 2011.
He's now
director for South and Central
Asia at the
Hudson Institute. He's also the
author of
"Pakistan: Between Mosque and
Military." And
Pamela Constable, who has
covered Pakistan
for The Washington Post, and is
the author
of "Playing With Fire: Pakistan
at War With
Itself."
And we welcome both of you back
to the program.
Mr. Ambassador, let me start
with you.
This group Jamaat-ur-Ahrar, who
are they?
Where do they come from?
HUSAIN HAQQANI, Former Pakistani
Ambassador
to the United States: It's a
group that was
part of the Pakistani Taliban,
the TTP. It
has an affiliation with
al-Qaida.
They are an offshoot of the TTP,
and they
have flirted with supporting --
support ISIS
recently. And they have been
responsible for
other actions, including
kidnappings for ransom
and terrorist acts in the past.
JUDY WOODRUFF: When you say they
have flirted
with ISIS, what do you mean?
HUSAIN HAQQANI: They issued a
statement saying
that "We agree with ISIS
objectives," but
they didn't go so far as to
disassociate with
al-Qaida and affiliate
themselves with ISIS.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pam Constable,
what would you
add to that? Help us figure out
where -- how
they fit into what we already
know about the
Taliban and ISIS in this part of
the world.
PAMELA CONSTABLE, The Washington
Post: Well,
it's interesting because, of
course, the Pakistani
Taliban has always been
ferocious and very
anti-Western and very
anti-state, but this
group seems to have been even
more hard-line.
They split off from the Pakistan
Taliban because
it wasn't hard-line enough on
issues such
as Sharia law and real
fundamentalist values.
And the leader of this group is
from the border
tribal area up in the northwest.
But the fact
that they're focusing on Punjab
is extremely
interesting. And it's a major
challenge for
this government, unlike anything
they have
faced before.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Why is that
significant that
they went after Punjab and
specifically the
city of Lahore?
PAMELA CONSTABLE: Well, partly
because, as
you -- as the tape mentioned,
this is the
power base of the government,
but it's also
because Punjab has always been a
little bit
off-limits in terms of the
anti-terror fight.
There are some groups based in
Punjab that
have government support, whether
it's acknowledged
or not. They have gone very
lightly on them.
They have tried to appease them.
And now it
really is coming back to haunt
them, because
you have much more radical
groups coming in
and building on that foundation.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, why is
Punjab, why is Lahore
such a target?
HUSAIN HAQQANI: Well, Lahore is
only a target
yesterday, but the fact remains
that the rest
of the country has been a target
for much
longer.
The real problem lies in that
attitude of
the government of trying to
protect the parties
in Punjab, while going after the
terrorists
in other parts of the country,
but not in
the Punjab. And that's what has
come back
to bite them.
The fact of the matter is that
the Pakistani
military and the Pakistani
civilian leadership
easily gets distracted by
delusions of fighting
India and influence in
Afghanistan and allowing
certain jihadi groups to pursue
those objectives,
not realizing that they can end
up having
offshoots, just like the
Pakistani Taliban
came out of the Afghan Taliban.
The Pakistani
component of the Afghan Taliban
ended up becoming
a separate group.
And now Jamaat-ur-Ahrar has
broken away from
the Pakistani Taliban. Pakistan
has to make
a decision to go after all
terrorist groups,
as well as the mind-set that
breeds these
terrorists. And Pakistan has not
been able
to make that decision.
Every few years -- in fact, I
can recall at
least -- being in this studio
for at least
six times saying, whether
Pakistan is saying
or somebody is staying in the
studio Pakistan
is going after these people now,
it hasn't,
and 16 years have gone by.
JUDY WOODRUFF: How do you
explain, Pam Constable,
how much the government appears
to have taken
its eye off the ball? And what
is it that
this group wants? Is it just to
destroy anything
that doesn't agree with them?
Why specifically
children? This was a playground.
There were
children, women, and they ended
up mostly
killing Muslims.
PAMELA CONSTABLE: Well, they
want power. They
want religious power. They want
their vision
of the religion to prevail in
what has been
historically, at least in
theory, a multireligious
democracy, in which obviously
Muslim dominates,
but -- Islam dominates, but the
country has
always been very not open to
Christianity
only, but benefited enormously.
Some of the best schools and
colleges in Pakistan
have been Christian. So it's
always been a
popular group, a group that's
fit in and benefited
greatly the society. I think
it's important
to point out that these
extremists don't only
go after Christians. They go
after Shiite
Muslims and they go after Ahmadi
Muslims,
which is a very ostracized
Muslim minority.
They have been very badly
attacked by groups
like this.
So, this really is sort of the
sword arm of
extreme Sunni Islam acting
viciously, without
regard for any human life,
simply to make
a point, Easter, a park,
children, mothers,
playground. Notably, very little
guards, few
guards were there.
HUSAIN HAQQANI: And they justify
killing the
Muslims as well on grounds that
this is necessary
for advancing their cause.
Two things are at play here.
One, Pakistan's
involvement with jihadi groups
initially was
primarily as a strategic
investment, which
was supposed to bring them
benefits through
influence in Afghanistan and...
JUDY WOODRUFF: At the highest
levels.
HUSAIN HAQQANI: And the
liberation of Jammu
and Kashmir from India.
That has backfired. Now, even
though it has
backfired, Pakistan has been
very selective
in going after these jihadi
groups. And that
is the reason why the jihadi
groups pick up
specific targets like Shias or
Ahmadis or
Christians, as a means of
improving their
recruitment, playing on various
kinds of polarization,
and taking advantage of that to
advance in
society further.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pam Constable,
how much should
we look at this as an extension
of what ISIS
is doing in other parts of the
world, especially
in the Middle East, and how much
of this is
internal to Pakistan?
PAMELA CONSTABLE: I think it's
mostly internal,
but I think this group -- and I
think they
even said so -- groups like this
are taking
a leaf, taking an inspiration,
if you will,
from ISIS and saying, we can go
farther, we
can do more. You know, let's get
up to the
plate here.
But it's been going on a very
long time within
Pakistan, sort of creeping up
bomb by bomb
and attack by attack. It's not
new news. It's
the pace and the ferocity that
has increased.
And I think that that is because
they feel
emboldened by ISIS.
HUSAIN HAQQANI: And the state
has not taken
the measures that are necessary
to isolate
them all.
So, there are groups like
Lashkar-e-Taiba
and Jaish-e-Mohammed which
attack India. And
they are spared. Once they are
spared, it's
very possible that some of their
members will
actually join splinter groups
which will attack
Pakistan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And just very
quickly, in less
than a minute, to both of you,
when Prime
Minister Sharif says, "We're
going after the
people responsible, we're going
to something
about this," how realistic is
that?
HUSAIN HAQQANI: Well, people
like me at that
time say, I hope you can, but
Pakistan has
had eight prime ministers since
9/11, each
one of whom has said the same
thing. It hasn't
happened.
We need to examine why it hasn't
happened
and try to change that.
PAMELA CONSTABLE: The government
says, unofficially,
that it's going to be sending in
paramilitary
rangers in Punjab, which has
been somewhat
successful in Karachi, a very
violent city.
Let's see if they can do it. I
have serious
doubts, but let's see if they
can do it. Maybe
it will be a turning point. One
can always
hope.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Pam Constable,
Ambassador Husain
Haqqani, we thank you both.
PAMELA CONSTABLE: You're
welcome.
GWEN IFILL: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
waste to wattage,
creating energy from livestock
manure; a chronicle
of the 14-year manhunt for
Balkan war criminals;
and remembering an author with a
love for
the great outdoors. s
But, first, from Bernie Sanders'
Saturday
sweep to the continued war of
words between
the two GOP front-runners,
there's lots to
talk about this Politics Monday
with Tamara
Keith of NPR, and joining us
from Phoenix,
Arizona tonight, Amy Walter of
The Cook Political
Report.
Tam, three states for Bernie
Sanders this
weekend, does that mean he has
momentum?
TAMARA KEITH, National Public
Radio: He's
definitely claiming momentum,
but he still
has something of a math problem.
Going into Saturday, he needed
to win 58 percent
off all the remaining delegates
to clinch
the nomination, pledged
delegates. After that
huge, huge series of wins by
larger margins
than his campaign expected, he
needs 57 percent
of all the remaining delegates.
And not all
of the states that are coming up
are as favorable
to Sanders.
There aren't very many caucuses
left, and
there are several closed
primaries coming
up, including in New York state,
where Sanders
is planning to good up a good
fight, planning
to contest it, but it's a state
where Hillary
Clinton was elected senator
twice.
GWEN IFILL: So, Hawaii, Alaska
and Washington
state were fine victories for
what they were,
but they don't actually close
the gap that
much?
TAMARA KEITH: They close the gap
a bit. He
did cut into Hillary Clinton's
delegate lead,
but it doesn't change the math
fundamentally.
He still has a lot of work to
do.
And his campaign today in a
conference call
said that they're going to keep
fighting this
all the way, and they think that
neither candidate
will get a majority of the
pledged delegates
needed to actually clinch it
with just pledged
delegates, so they're going for
superdelegates,
which are the sort of party
establishment
people.
And Sanders' campaign today did
announce that
it has gotten one superdelegate
to support
him, one member of Congress,
Collin Peterson
from Minnesota. That's not a
tidal wave.
GWEN IFILL: So, Amy, that is --
there is still
on the Clinton side an
enthusiasm gap which
the Sanders people say will make
all the difference.
Is there anything to that?
AMY WALTER, The Cook Political
Report: Well,
I think the real challenge for
Hillary Clinton
has been the fact that Bernie
Sanders, to
his credit, has really driven
the terms of
this campaign and this debate.
It has been
on the terrain he wants to be
playing on.
The talk now is about issues
that Bernie Sanders
has been talking about really
since he first
got into politics. The talk
about income inequality,
the rigged economy, this is
where the debate
has been, trade, et cetera. And
this may or
may not have been where Hillary
Clinton wanted
to have the debate, but it's
where she been
forced to go.
At the end of the day, though,
completely
agree with Tamara, where it
becomes a math
problem. Not only has she
secured more delegates,
pledged delegates, the people
that you get
when you win primaries. She's
won more votes
than he has as well, so she has
more people
who have actually turned out and
voted for
her.
But I think you're right, Gwen,
that what
we're seeing, though, is an
enthusiasm gap
with a group of voters that is
critical in
November, and that's younger
voters. We know
that it was critical for
President Obama in
his victories in 2008 and '12.
What Hillary Clinton is going to
have to do
is to prove to those younger
voters who keep
turning out for Bernie Sanders,
even though
they probably intellectually
know he may not
be the nominee, but they keep
turning out
for him because there is
something about him
that strikes them, and that, she
has not figured
out how to crack.
GWEN IFILL: Well, there has been
something
of a war of words between the
Sanders camp
and the Hillary camp today, on
the Republican
side, the war of words has been
a little less
elevated, shall we say?
Let's listen to Ted Cruz today.
SEN. TED CRUZ (R-TX),
Presidential Candidate:
When it comes to civility, there
have been
other candidates who have
demonstrated a willingness
to go to the gutter, to make
personal attacks,
to make sleazy attacks. I think
the people,
the American people are sick of
that. That
has no place in politics. No
candidate should
be doing what Donald Trump did
last week,
which is attacking my wife and
attacking my
family.
GWEN IFILL: So, it's been
well-documented
everywhere how much of these
attacks and counterattacks
have been going on between Trump
and Cruz,
and even John Kasich has said,
please, let's
leave the family out of it.
But I guess the question in this
is, how low
can they go, Tam?
TAMARA KEITH: That's question I
ask a lot
again and again.
And it's not clear. There is
that old saying
-- and I don't know who gets
full credit for
it -- I think John McCain is one
of the people
who gets credit for it -- that
when you wrestle
with a pig, you both get dirty
and the pig
enjoys it.
GWEN IFILL: Right.
TAMARA KEITH: In this analogy,
and I'm not
calling Donald Trump a pig here,
because I
would not do that.
GWEN IFILL: Be careful. No.
TAMARA KEITH: However, the past
has proven
that people who wrestle with
Donald Trump
end up worser -- worser -- worse
for wear.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
What do you think about that,
Amy?
AMY WALTER: Absolutely, it
doesn't do anybody
any good.
And, listen, if you're the
Republican Party
right now, you are so -- just
the architects
of the Republican Party, or the
establishment
of the Republican Party, they
are desperate
to try to figure out a way to
bring this party
together.
This party has been now
fracturing and there
is -- the divisiveness is
significant, and
this is not helping at all. And,
in fact,
if you want to look at the
trajectory for
the Republican Party in its
approval ratings
over the course of this
campaign, it's only
gone like this.
This is not helping the overall
-- whoever
the nominee ends up being. This
is not helping
the image of the Republican
Party. This isn't
helping Republicans in Congress.
And this
is going to be the major
challenge for Republicans
going forward, which is, how do
they unify
these disparate parts of
themselves, when
the candidates can't even have a
civil conversation,
nonetheless agree on the
direction forward?
GWEN IFILL: Let me ask you both
about the
story in The New York Times
today Nick Confessore
wrote about the fact that the
Republican establishment
finds itself in such a corner,
because the
big donors, the big people who
go to the cocktail
parties didn't see the Trump
train coming.
TAMARA KEITH: It's a challenge.
And there is this thought that
the Chamber
of Commerce Republican Party is
not the Republican
Party of people who went through
a wrenching
recession, who feel like their
lives are not
back, even if the jobs report
says they are.
Their wages are stagnant. You
know, they don't
know how they feel about trade
deals.
And there is Donald Trump, and
he is sort
of emoting in the very way that
people -- he's
saying things that people want
to hear.
GWEN IFILL: Amy, it also seems
that we're
not just talking about
blue-collar, underemployed,
unemployed people. We're talking
white-collar
businesspeople, too.
AMY WALTER: That's right.
This is what Donald Trump has
done very well,
which is he has definitely
tapped into that
anger and that angst with
blue-collar, working-class
Americans, but he's also doing
well or well
enough with the so-called
establishment, Chamber
of Commerce types, many of whom
I speak with
and they say, you know, the
thing about Donald
Trump is, yes, he says things
that are outrageous,
no, I don't believe he's going
to follow through
on a lot of things that he says
he is going
to do, but I do believe he's a
good businessman
and a good negotiator. And they
say, we just
simply need to shake things up.
So both -- he's able to win
because he has
a group of voters who believe
he's a hard-liner
who isn't going to negotiate or
compensate
in any way, shape and form, and
then he's
able to get another group of
voters who believe
his success is based on the fact
that he's
such a good negotiator.
That's why it's been a challenge
for the never-Trump
folks to stop him, because he's
not just pulling
off one group of voters.
GWEN IFILL: Well, and the
enthusiasm gap on
the Republican side seems to
work in his favor
-- I mean, the Democratic side
-- seems to
work on his favor on the
Republican side.
Amy Walter, Tamara Keith, it's
Monday. Thank
you both.
TAMARA KEITH: You're welcome.
AMY WALTER: You're welcome.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Now a unique look
at a completely
different kind of power: the
potential of
organic waste as a renewable
energy source.
A fair warning of sorts for
those of you either
preparing or eating dinner,
given the subject
matter.
Public Media's Inside Energy and
Rocky Mountain
PBS Dan Boyce explains.
DAN BOYCE: Jon Slutsky has been
milking cows
since the early 1980s, his
professional life
rising and falling with what his
livestock
excrete, and not just from their
udders.
JON SLUTSKY, La Luna Dairy: It's
like a buffet
for the manure connoisseur.
DAN BOYCE: Manure, the dirty
dark side of
working with these adorable
Holsteins, is
the enormous logistical
challenge of dealing
with waste. Slutsky considers
himself an environmentally
conscious guy, so he worries
about all the
methane produced as that manure
breaks down.
JON SLUTSKY: Then the whole
methane thing
and greenhouse gases, all of
that is more
important to many in our
industry.
DAN BOYCE: If only he lived
about 50 miles
southeast. This is Heartland
Biogas, a new
facility bring in truckload
after truckload
of manure from nearby dairies.
All of the
buildings and pools here add up
to what's
called a digester.
BOB YOST, A1 Organics: You can
think of the
digester the same as your own
guts, if you
can.
DAN BOYCE: So, this is where all
the cow poop
goes?
BOB YOST: This is -- the cow
poop ends up
right here.
DAN BOYCE: Bob Yost is showing
me around Heartland.
What's brought in gets
liquefied, cooked up
and mixed together, speeding up
the production
of methane. And, here, they
actually want
methane. With a little more
refining, that
methane becomes chemically
identical to the
natural gas drilled from
underground.
The gas produced here goes
straight into a
pipeline on site, just like any
other natural
gas.
BOB YOST: It's injected into the
pipeline
and then it's delivered to
anywhere in the
country.
DAN BOYCE: Destructive
greenhouse gases that
would be escaping into the
atmosphere anyway
going to good use.
Dairy farms have been building
digesters for
years, but the technology is
advancing and
diversifying. It turns out, the
way to get
the most methane from your
digester is to
have a mixture of manure and
food scraps.
WOMAN: I got the Turkey bacon
guac burger.
DAN BOYCE: That's where
restaurants like Denver's
Park Burger come in.
T.J. MCREYNOLDS, Park Burger: We
do have a
couple of gray recycling bins,
as well as
bins with no bag, which is our
composting
setup.
DAN BOYCE: General manager T.J.
McReynolds
pays a little bit more for
composting services
on top of his trash bill. He
thought it would
all end up as mulch somewhere.
T.J. MCREYNOLDS: Never once did
I even consider
it being used for natural gas.
DAN BOYCE: Hundreds of Colorado
restaurants,
schools and groceries have begun
sending their
scraps to Heartland.
BOB YOST: There could be 25, 30
semi-loads
per day eventually of food waste
coming in,
and then the manure is added to
that.
DAN BOYCE: The company Yost
works with, A1
Organics, coordinates the
delivery of all
that food waste. It comes in all
types, a
lot of it still in packaging.
BOB YOST: Well, this had sweet
tea in it.
DAN BOYCE: Luckily this machine
at the digester
can tear all that apart to get
to the valuable
organics inside.
Unfortunately, all of this is a
prospect tantalizingly
out of reach for Slutsky. His
farm is too
far from the Heartland facility,
and too small
to build his own primitive
digester, which
really only makes financial
sense for operations
with 2,000 cows or more. Slutsky
has 1,500.
JON SLUTSKY: Well, we have a
business to run,
and it's not going to do us any
good if we
build a digester and go out of
business.
DAN BOYCE: It's a tough position
to be in:
big enough to have to deal with
mounds and
mounds of manure, too small to
make any money
off it. It's where most American
dairies find
themselves, their methane
remaining wasted.
But there is another source of
biogas, sitting
right under our noses.
DAN TONELLO, Persigo Wastewater
Services Manager:
This is what eight million
gallons of sewage
a day looks like.
DAN BOYCE: Yes, human waste can
also be turned
into power. We're at the
wastewater treatment
plant in Grand Junction,
Colorado. And that
distinctive smell of sewage is
starting to
smell like money to manager Dan
Tonello. The
plant has had a digester for
decades, but
most of the methane used to be
flared off
into the air.
DAN TONELLO: Not good for the
environment
and a waste of a wonderful
resource.
DAN BOYCE: So the city spent
just under $3
million for the natural gas
refining equipment.
And, rather than just putting it
into a pipeline
or generating electricity with
it, Tonello
had another idea.
DAN TONELLO: In the evening,
when the trucks
are done with their routes, they
hook up,
fill up.
DAN BOYCE: Grand Junction has
been replacing
an aging fleet of garbage trucks
and buses
with natural gas vehicles fueled
mostly by
the human-sourced gas from the
treatment plant.
Tonello says Grand Junction is
the first city
in the nation to do that.
DAN TONELLO: We're looking at
hundreds of
thousands of dollars a year
being saved by
implementing this process.
JOANNA UNDERWOOD, Energy Vision:
That's a
model for small wastewater
treatment plants
anywhere in the country.
DAN BOYCE: Joanna Underwood
works with Energy
Vision, an environmental group
which promotes
the use of this renewable
natural gas. She
says using biogas to run a fleet
of vehicles
is the most efficient way to use
a digester.
JOANNA UNDERWOOD: Every time you
convert a
bus fleet or a refuse truck
fleet or a produce
delivery fleet to renewable
natural gas, you
have had a huge impact.
DAN BOYCE: Because, more often
than not, those
natural gas vehicles are
replacing older,
more polluting diesel trucks.
Underwood says,
if all the organic waste in the
country were
gathered from dairies, food
producers and
sewage plants, current
technologies could
produce enough natural gas to
replace about
half of the diesel fuel used in
the U.S. transportation
sector.
And wastewater treatment plants
could provide
as much as 12 percent of the
nation's electricity,
turning waste into a serious
powerhouse.
For the "PBS NewsHour," I'm Dan
Boyce reporting
from Grand Junction, Colorado.
GWEN IFILL: Last Thursday, a
U.N. tribunal
convicted former Bosnian Serb
leader Radovan
Karadzic of war crimes and
genocide in the
1990s Balkan wars.
A look at how tough it was to
hunt down those
indicted is the focus of the
newest addition
to the "NewsHour" Bookshelf.
Margaret Warner has that.
MARGARET WARNER: The genocidal
crimes of the
1990s Balkan wars stunned the
world, mass
killings, concentration camps,
systematic
rape.
Many, but by no means all of the
perpetrators
were the majority Serbs,
starting with Serbian
President Slobodan Milosevic.
The U.N. set
up an international tribunal to
investigate
and indict some 161 people it
found most responsible.
The challenge was to actually
apprehend them.
How they did so is captured in a
gripping
new book by Julian Borger,
longtime correspondent
and editor at The Guardian
newspaper, titled
"The Butcher's Trail: How the
Search for Balkan
War Criminals Became the World's
Most Successful
Manhunt."
Julian Borger, welcome.
You open this book with a really
vivid account
of the capture of the last of
these criminals
in a forest in Serbia. Who was
he and what
had he done?
JULIAN BORGER, "The Butcher's
Trail: How the
Search for Balkan War Criminals
Became the
World's Most Successful
Manhunt": He was Goran
Hadzic.
And he used to run a Serb
statelet inside
Croatia which had been carved
out of Croatia
by what was called ethnic
cleansing, a euphemism
for mass killing of other
ethnicities. So
he had overseen that killing on
a large scale.
MARGARET WARNER: And you had a
particularly
horrible example, more than 260
men and boys
taken to the forest and just
executed.
JULIAN BORGER: Yes, that was the
Vukovar massacre,
and that was the first
large-scale massacre
since the Nazi era. So it came
as a complete
shock to Europe.
MARGARET WARNER: So you covered
these wars.
How typical was Hadzic in terms
of the perpetrators?
In other words, what did you
discover about
what drove these people into the
most grotesque,
kind of savage brutality?
JULIAN BORGER: A lot of them, a
lot of the
people who rose to prominence
and ended up
indicted war criminals, as war
criminals,
came from very ordinary
backgrounds.
And I think the lesson that I
learned by going
through their life stories is
that there are
these people all around us. And
when a permissive
atmosphere is created in which
that they can
rule the roost, then it creates
the conditions
for which these kind of mass
murders can take
part.
MARGARET WARNER: And how much of
it was driven
by ethnic hatreds? I mean, you
had Christian
Serbs and Croats against Bosnian
Muslims,
but also against each other, vs.
just being
perpetrated by outright
psychopaths?
JULIAN BORGER: It was
perpetrated by political
leaders.
It was political leaders who in
the -- with
the aim of expanding their
territory and consolidating
their own power set one ethnic
group against
another and brought nationalism
to the fore
as a replacement for communism,
which was
in collapse. And so they offered
something
that seemed visceral and
certain. And they
drove this largely for their own
political
motives.
MARGARET WARNER: What's really,
truly groundbreaking
about this book is what it took
to apprehend
them.
The International Tribunal
headed by a Canadian
judge, Louise Arbour, didn't get
much help
apprehending them from this NATO
stabilization
force that was, the U.S., the
Brits, et cetera.
Why not?
JULIAN BORGER: Well, when the
NATO went in,
initially as a peacekeeping
force, all it
wanted to do was keep the peace.
It didn't
want to do any other tasks that
might be risky,
that might risk upsetting the
peace. They
called it mission creep.
It's hard now to look back at
that time before
9/11 and remember how
casualty-averse, how
risk-averse the U.S. military,
the British
military were. It was said, if
you were a
general officer at that time,
you were unlikely
to get another star if you had
casualties
under your watch.
MARGARET WARNER: You managed to
get those
who did hunt these men down to
talk you, for
the first time really that they
ever had.
If you could sum it up, who were
they?
JULIAN BORGER: It was a shifting
cast of characters
involved, diplomats, special
forces from six
nations altogether, intelligence
agencies
from others.
But the first one is an
interesting arrest,
the first arrest specifically
for the War
Crimes Tribunal in The Hague,
which was kind
of an international pickup team,
working for
the U.N. that involved an
American diplomat
general, an American prosecutor,
a British
policeman, a Czech homicide
detective, and
a newly formed Polish special
forces unit
that had only a few years been
on opposite
sides of the Iron Curtain.
And, together, they did
something that NATO
at that time was afraid of
doing. They took
a risk in order to carry out the
U.N. mandate
to make an arrest. And that
really broke the
-- opened the floodgates.
MARGARET WARNER: What did it
take to get these
guys? Some of them were hiding
in plain sight.
JULIAN BORGER: They knew where
they were.
And it was just a question of
getting them
to a place where there was
unlikely to be
collateral damage, passersby
would be hurt.
So it was a question of
following them, often
in their cars, stopping the car,
ripping them
out, the kind of scenes that
have since become
familiar after Bosnia in the
form of renditions.
MARGARET WARNER: Rendition.
JULIAN BORGER: These were the
kind of early
forms of rendition. The
important difference
is, they were underpinned by
Security Council
resolutions and a body of
international law.
MARGARET WARNER: Jumping
forward, did this
have any deterrent effect, the
success of
these apprehensions and so many
of them brought
to justice? I mean, we see mass
atrocities
of civilians now going on in
Syria and other
parts of the Middle East, and
the perpetrators
don't seem at all afraid of
being prosecuted.
JULIAN BORGER: Well, I think
this manhunt
represented the high watermark
in terms of
enforcement of international
humanitarian
law, and I think it pushed back
the boundaries
of impunity for these kinds of
mass crimes.
But I think, since that manhunt,
that achievement
has been allowed to unravel. The
Hague War
Crimes Tribunal had
international support.
Its permanent successor, the
International
Criminal Court, hasn't had that
support from
the big powers, from the U.S.,
from Russia
or China and India.
And because of that, it doesn't
have that
clout. It hasn't been able to
enforce its
judgments. And I think the
consequences is
the return of impunity. And we
see the results
of that now in the Middle East,
in Syria,
in Iraq, where terrorism has had
its roots
in mass crimes committed by
regimes.
MARGARET WARNER: Well, a very
disappointing
result.
Julian Borger, author of "The
Butcher's Trail,"
thank you.
JULIAN BORGER: Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally tonight:
remembering
one of the nation's most
versatile writers.
Jeffrey Brown has the story.
JEFFREY BROWN: Jim Harrison was
a prolific
writer of fiction and poetry,
most often of
men and women in the drama of
rural America
and the natural world. Among his
best known
works are "Legends of the Fall,"
"Dalva,"
and the more recent "Brown Dog."
A new novel, "The Ancient
Minstrel," came
out just this month, and a new
volume of poetry,
"Dead Man's Float," earlier this
year. He'd
been a Hollywood screenwriter, a
food writer
for "Esquire" magazine, a man of
many pursuits
who lived large and died this
weekend at age
78.
In 2009, I visited Harrison at
his home in
Montana. Here's a look back.
JIM HARRISON, Author: Other than
fishing and
a little bird-hunting, all I do
is write.
JEFFREY BROWN: Harrison is a
determined outsider,
in all senses.
JIM HARRISON: You really get a
hang of the
country, rather than be stuck in
what I call
the geo-piety of the Eastern
Seaboard.
JEFFREY BROWN: Careful, because
that's where
I am.
JIM HARRISON: I know it, but you
deserve it,
too. But it does happen.
JEFFREY BROWN: Now 71, Jim
Harrison is a Falstaffian
figure: blind in his left eye
from a childhood
accident, chain-smoking his
American Spirit
cigarettes, part wild man, part
cultivated
literary lion, who peppers his
speech with
talk of birds and great poets of
the past.
It's poetry, in fact, that has
remained Harrison's
first love. His new collection
is called "In
Search of Small Gods."
JIM HARRISON: You sense those
spirits in certain,
often remote places, whether
it's the spirit
of animals, the spirit of trees.
So those
are the small gods.
JEFFREY BROWN: And they appear
throughout
these poetry, so it sounds like
they're coming
from the walks.
JIM HARRISON: I think that's
true, you know,
because sometimes you have
little breakthroughs.
I've known this group of ravens
for 19 years,
for instance, Chihuahuan ravens,
Mexican ravens.
And last year, several times,
they began to
take walks with me.
JEFFREY BROWN: But then you put
them into
poetry?
JIM HARRISON: Yes, then you do.
You know,
what is it that Blake said? How
do we know
but that every bird who cuts the
airy way
is an immense world of delight
close to our
senses five, that perception?
What is possible
in the natural world?
I have been inordinately
productive in the
last five or six years, and I
think it was
boiling down your life.
Dhogan (ph), an old 14th-century
Zen philosopher,
talked about cooking down your
life. You cook
down your life and then the
sauce is just
right, so you can let go.
JEFFREY BROWN: There is, in
fact, much about
loss and grief in Harrison's
writing these
days. His brother and a number
of friends
have died in recent years. And
on our walk
near Antelope Butte, he told me
of a talk
he'd had with one of them, a
Native American,
just before his death.
JIM HARRISON: And I was really
falling apart,
and he says: "Don't be upset.
These things
happen to people." Isn't that an
incredible
thing to say?
JEFFREY BROWN: Yes.
Of course, a lot of characters
in your books...
JIM HARRISON: ... are like that,
yes.
JEFFREY BROWN: ... are like
that, huh? "These
things happen." They go through
all kinds
of tragedies.
JIM HARRISON: Well, that is that
Native American
stoicism. You know, they tend to
see the whole
arc.
"Moving higher my thumping chest
recites the
names of a dozen friends who
have died in
recent years, names now
incomprehensible as
the mountains across the river
far behind
me. I will always be walking up
toward Antelope
Butte. Perhaps, when we die, our
names are
taken from us by a divine magnet
and they
are free to flutter here and
there within
the bodies of birds. I will be a
simple crow
who can reach the top of
Antelope Butte."
JUDY WOODRUFF: And you can watch
Jeff's full
profile of Jim Harrison on our
home page.
That's PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: Also on the
"NewsHour" online:
The weather phenomenon known as
El Nino has
a new cousin. Atmospheric
scientists have
identified an ocean temperature
anomaly that
can predict droughts on the East
Coast up
to two months before they hit.
Read how the
team plans to build an alert
system based
on these findings. That's on our
home page,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for
tonight.
On Tuesday, our series on foster
care continues
with the inspiring story of a
track star who
beat the odds.
I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening.
For all of us here at the "PBS
NewsHour,"
thank you and good night.